


Daniel P. Shoemaker 





Associate Professor and Racheff Faculty Fellow


(217) 244-4991
dpshoema@illinois.edu
1017 Superconductivity Center


For More Information
Shoemaker research group page

Professional Highlights
Professor Daniel P. Shoemaker received his BS with Honors in  Materials  Science and Engineering from the University of Illinois in 2006 and  his  PhD in Materials from the University of California, Santa Barbara in  2010.  His doctoral work focused on using neutron scattering and  real-space modeling  to understand the structure-property relationships  of disordered magnetic and  electronic oxides. In 2011 he began a  postdoctoral appointment in the Materials  Science Division of Argonne  National Laboratory where he investigated the  synthesis of  superconductors and semiconductors with a focus on in situ  spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction. Shoemaker joined the Department of  Materials  Science and Engineering at the University of Illinois at  Urbana-Champaign as an  Assistant Professor in August 2013.

Research StatementOur group focuses on synthesizing new inorganic materials  and  uncovering routes to engineer their response to electronic, magnetic,  and  chemical stimuli. Understanding synthesis allows us to use  chemistry to tune,  alter, or reassemble materials. We grow single  crystals, microstructured  composites, and nanomaterials, and make heavy  use of electronic, magnetic, and  optical measurements. Current  research topics include:
In situ synthesis:  Many arenas of energy  conversion, such as light absorbers, batteries, and  catalysis, are  limited by the library of viable materials. We use special  growth cells  to observe metastable synthesis reactions as they happen in the  solid,  liquid, and gas phase. These reactions produce new compounds that are   inaccessible from a traditional approach based on equilibrium phase  diagrams. X-ray  diffraction and optical spectroscopy can reveal how  compounds form and identify  new materials on the fly. We also develop  computational tools to handle the complex  data collected during any  given experiment.
Micro- and nano-structured magnetism: Performance of   magnetic materials is dictated by complex interactions on multiple  length  scales, from micron-sized domains to the angstrom-level exchange  interactions  between atoms. We synthesize magnetic materials and  develop tools for  characterizing and modeling their defects,  inclusions, and microstructure.  Understanding these relationships  allows us to refine our syntheses, improve  performance, and uncover new  candidate materials.

Structure and dynamics of correlated materials: During our   investigations of superconductors, dielectrics, and phase-change  materials, intriguing  physical phenomena arise when materials deviate  from their ideal structure due  to formation of defects or disordered  domains. We conduct high-energy X-ray and  neutron scattering  experiments at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne  National  Laboratory and the Lujan Neutron Scattering Center at Los Alamos   National Laboratory. Scattering and spectroscopy allow us to reconstruct   structural snapshots of disordered materials and understand how  chemical  bonding dictates magnetic and electronic properties.

Research Areas
Advanced Materials for Electronics and Communications
Sustainable Materials for Energy and the Environment


Research Honors
University of Illinois Campus Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Advising (February 2024)
Engineering Council Outstanding Advising Award (March 2020)
2017 Ivan Racheff Fellow Award (2017)
DOE Early Career Award (2015)
Materials Research Society Graduate Student Gold Award (2010)
23rd Louis Rosen Thesis Prize - Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (2011)

Recent Courses TaughtMSE 308 - Materials Laboratory II
MSE 403 - Synthesis of Materials
MSE 405 - Microstructure Determination
MSE 406 - Thermal-Mech Behavior of Matls
MSE 489 - Matl Select for Sustainability

