


Christopher Schmitz 





Teaching Professor


(217) 300-0392
cdschmit@illinois.edu
3066 Electrical & Computer Eng Bldg


For More Information


Education
Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering at the University of Illinois, 2002.

BiographyDr. Schmitz graduated valedictorian of Pana High School in 1988 and was a Bronze Tablet recipient upon receiving his BS in Electrical Engineering at the University of Illinois in 1993.  He received his MS in Electrical Engineering at the University of Illinois in 1996 in the area of fault-tolerant adaptive filtering.  Schmitz worked at TRW Space and Electronics Group in Hermosa Beach, California, in the area of  satellite communication. He completed his Ph.D. in 2002 in interference cancellation in multi-user communications. Upon graduation, he joined Beckman Institute of the University of Illinois to develop and test signal processing and wireless communication algorithms for advanced hearing device designs.  Since 2005, Schmitz has also been active in the Electrical and Computer Engineering department performing course development work and teaching in the areas of digital signal processing and digital communications.  Since 2012, he serves the department as Chief Undergraduate Advisor and the course director for ECE110, Intro to Electronics. His website can be found at http://publish.illinois.edu/cdschmitz/.
Academic Positions
Teaching Professor, U of I, Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2021-present
Chief Undergraduate Advisor, U of I, Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2012-present

Teaching Statement"Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler." -- restatement of EinsteinTeaching is vital to the success of the University of Illinois. Students must be engaged in the course. Demonstrations and experiential learning provide a means to present complex ideas to students in intuitive ways.
Research StatementMy research interests are primarily two-fold: 1) Promoting substantial experiential learning for undergraduates at all levels of the curriculum and 2) improving engineering education through interactions with other educators throughout the College of Engineering.
Undergraduate Research OpportunitiesI will entertain undergraduate proposals in the areas of signal processing, communications, and circuits at any level of study. I also have an undergraduate research group, WaggleNet, the members of which work to collect and process data from operational honeybee colonies to reduce bee-related problems. WaggleNet.org
Research Interests
Adaptive Signal Processing and Beamforming
Wireless Communication
Improving Education in STEM Disciplines


Research Areas
Adaptive signal processing
Audio, speech, music and auditory processing
Signal detection and estimation
Wireless communication systems


Recent Courses TaughtECE 110 - Introduction to Electronics
ECE 198 JS1 (ECE 198 JS2) - James Scholars Honors Course
ECE 199 - ECE 110 Merit Section
ECE 199 - ECE 120 Merit Section
ECE 199 - Undergraduate Open Seminar
ECE 210 - Analog Signal Processing
ECE 211 - Analog Circuits & Systems

