


John C Hart 





Professor


(217) 333-8740
jch@illinois.edu
3227 Siebel Center for Comp Sci


For More Information
John Hart's homepage

BiographyJohn C. Hart is Professor and Director of Online and Professional Programs in the Department of Computer Science, and the Executive Associate Dean of the Graduate College of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His research on computer graphics and data visualization has been supported by Adobe, AT&T, DARPA, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, Nokia, NVIDIA and the NSF. He has worked with graphics hardware manufacturers, defense contractors, visual effects studios, game developers and a medical imaging startup, and has provided IP expertise for Microsoft, NVIDIA, AMD, Samsung and others.Prof. Hart recently designed, launched and directs the Master of Computer Science in Data Science program, an innovative new online masters degree program in data science offered by the University of Illinois through the Coursera scalable learning platform. Now only in its third year, this online MCS has grown to be UIUC’s second largest graduate program. His “Data Visualization” MOOC on the Coursera platform has reached over 360,000 learners.Prof. Hart is the graphics area editor for ACM Books, a past Editor-in-Chief of ACM Transactions on Graphics, a past member of the ACM SIGGRAPH Executive Committee, a co-author of “Real-Time Shading,” a contributing author to “Texturing and Modeling: A Procedural Approach,” and an executive producer of the documentary “The Story of Computer Graphics.” Prof. Hart received his Ph.D. from the Electronic Visualization Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Chicago in 1991.
Major Consulting Activities
Consultant - Pratt & Whitney - Hartford, CT - 2011
Graphics Hardware Expert, through Sidley Austin LLP - Microsoft, 2010
Consultant - SAIC - Champaign, IL - June-Sep. 2008
Visiting researcher - Adobe Systems, Inc. - Seattle, WA - June 1, 2007 - November 2, 2007
Consultant - The Teaching Company - Chantilly, VA - 2003


Research Areas
Computers and Education
Interactive Computing


Recent Courses TaughtCIC 500 - CIC Traveling Scholar
CS 416 - Data Visualization
CS 418 (CSE 427) - Interactive Computer Graphics
CS 498 DDV (CS 498 DV) - Data Visualiztion
GC 498 - Graduate Domestic Study Away
GC 499 - Graduate College Study Abroad
GC 599 - Thesis Research

