


Lu Chen she/her/hers





Adjunct Assistant Professor



lchen721@illinois.edu
 


For More Information
Research website of Chen Lab


Education
Ph.D., Physics, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, 2020

Bachelor of Science, Physics, Peking University, 2014


BiographyLu Chen was born and raised in Lanzhou, China. She received her bachelor’s degree from the School of Physics at Peking University in 2014. Then she moved to the United States to pursue her graduate study at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor and got her PhD in 2020. During her PhD, she worked in the lab of Professor Lu Li where she studied the electrical, thermal, and magnetic properties of various quantum materials. Subsequently, she moved to the Institut Quantique at Université de Sherbrooke in Québec, Canada, and worked there as a Prize Postdoctoral Fellow in the lab of Professor Louis Taillefer. During her postdoc, she obtained expertise in conducting thermal Hall effect measurements in novel quantum materials. She is now a postdoc in Professor James Analytis’s group at the University of California Berkeley and is expected to start her new position as an assistant professor at the Department of Physics at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign in Jan 2026.
Academic Positions
Assistant Professor, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Physics, from 2026

Postdoctoral Fellow, University of California Berkeley, Physics, 2024 to 2025

Prize Postdoctoral Fellow, Université de Sherbrooke, Physics, 2020 to 2024


Research StatementMy research interests lie in the field of experimental condensed matter physics, more specifically, quantum materials. The development of modern technologies in all fields highly relies on the properties of materials. The vast majority of materials’s properties can not be fully understood with only classical physics or a single atom’s behavior. Instead, it involves the understanding of collective motions of excitations with strong correlations using quantum physics, which redefines these materials as “quantum materials”. I investigate the thermal, electrical, magnetic, and thermoelectric properties of various novel quantum materials, such as unconventional superconductors, quantum spin liquids, and topological materials at extremely low temperatures down to millikelvin and strong magnetic fields up to 100 Tesla. The experimental approaches that I employ are electrical transport, thermal transport, thermoelectric, and torque magnetometry measurements. I am interested in not only understanding fundamental physics phenomena in quantum materials but also designing new experimental techniques to further advance my research. 
Post-Doctoral Research OpportunitiesNow, we are actively recruiting highly motivated postdocs with a background in experimental condensed matter physics to join our research group. Postdocs who are interested in our research are encouraged to get in touch via email.
Graduate Research OpportunitiesNow, we are actively recruiting highly motivated graduate students to join our research group. Students who are interested can apply to the PhD program in the Department of Physics and are encouraged to get in touch via email.
Undergraduate Research OpportunitiesWe are actively recruiting highly motivated undergraduate students to join our research group. Undergraduates who are interested in our research are encouraged to get in touch via email.
Research Interests
Strongly correlated materials

Frustrated magnets
Unconventional superconductors
Topological materials
Electrical transport
Thermal transport
Torque magnetometry
Thermoelectric


Research Areas
Condensed Matter Physics (experimental)


Selected Articles in Journals
Lu Chen, Léna Le Roux, Gaël Grissonannche, Marie-Eve Boulanger, Steven Thériault, Ruixing Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, S. Pyon, T. Takayama, H. Takagi, Kejun Xu, Zhi-Xun Shen, and Louis Taillefer, Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in cuprates, Physical Review X 14, 041011 (2024)   

Lu Chen*, Étienne Lefrançois*, Ashvini Vallipuram, Quentin Barthélemy, Amirreza Ataei, Weiliang Yao, Yuan Li, and Louis Taillefer, Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in a Kitaev candidate material, Nature Communications 15, 3513 (2024)

Ashvini Vallipuram*, Lu Chen*, Emma Campillo, Manel Mezidi, Gaël Grissonnanche, Mark P. Zic, Yuntian Li, Ian R. Fisher, Jordan Baglo, and Louis Taillefer, Role of magnetic ions in the thermal Hall effect of the paramagnetic insulator TmVO4, Physical Review B 110, 045144 (2024) 

Lu Chen*, Marie-Eve Boulanger*, Zhi-Cheng Wang, Fazel Tafti, and Louis Taillefer, Large phonon thermal Hall conductivity in the antiferromagnetic insulator Cu3TeO6, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 119, e2208016119 (2022)

Ziji Xiang, Lu Chen, Kuan-Wen Chen, Colin Tinsman, Yuki Sato, Tomoya Asaba, Helen Lu, Yuichi Kasahara, Marcelo Jaime, Fedor Balakirev, Fumitoshi Iga, Yuji Matsuda, John Singleton, and Lu Li, Unusual high-field metal in a Kondo Insulator, Nature Physics 17, 788 (2021)

Lu Chen, Ziji Xiang, Colin Tinsman, Bin Lei, Xianhui Chen, G. D. Gu, and Lu Li, Spontaneous Nernst effect in an iron-based superconductor Fe1+yTe1-xSex, Physical Review B 102, 054503 (2020) 

Lu Chen, Fan Yu, Ziji Xiang, Tomoya Asaba, Colin Tinsman, Benjamin Lawson, Paul M. Sass, Weida Wu, B. L. Kang, Xianhui Chen, and Lu Li, Torque differential magnetometry using the qPlus-mode of a quartz tuning fork, Physical Review Applied 9, 024005 (2018)


Invited Lectures
Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in Kitaev candidate materials and cuprates

Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in cuprates and other quantum materials

Thermal Hall effect in quantum materials
Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in quantum materials

Phonon thermal Hall effect in Cu3TeO6 and doped Sr2IrO4

Planar thermal Hall effect from phonons in Kitaev materials and cuprates


Conferences Organized or Chaired
2023 Summer School for CIFAR Quantum Materials Program, Toronto, Canada

2023 Summer School for CIFAR Quantum Materials Program, Montreal, Canada


Research Honors
Martin and Beate Block Winter Award, Aspen Winter Conference, 2023

Prize Postdoctoral Fellowship, Institut Quantique de l'Université de Sherbrooke, 2022

ProQuest Distinguished Dissertation Awards, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, 2021

Rackham Predoctoral Fellowship, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, 2019

Barnett Award, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, 2018


