


Madhusudan Parthasarathy 





Professor


(217) 244-1323
madhu@illinois.edu
3226 Siebel Center for Comp Sci


For More Information
Madhusudan Parthasarathy's home page

Education
2002 Ph.D., Theoretical Computer Science, Institute of Mathematical Sciences, University of Madras, Chennai, India.

Professional Highlights
 Defined a formal language class called  visibly pushdown languages  (also called  nested word  languages. 
This has had a tremendous impact in academia (see Wikipedia page entries: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nested_word ).
This has not just been widely cited, but has defined a new model that people have extensively studied
 (see http://scholar.google.com/scholar?as_q=&as_oq=%22nested+words%22+%22visibly+pushdown%22 for a Google Scholar search for "nested words" OR "visibly pushdown" that lists more than 940 entries).



The class of visibly pushdown languages is an insertion into the Chomsky hierarchy, falling between regular languages and deterministic context-free languages, but which possesses most closure properties that regular languages have while yet remaining tractable. In particular, the inclusion problem is decidable and this has led to applications ranging from XML processing to program verification to programming languages. 

Research Interests
  Reasoning with heaps in software verification (Natural proofs, Strand, separation logic); 

    Software Verification; 
    Reliable and secure software engineering; 
    Security; 
    Program Synthesis; 
    Logic and Automata Theory.



Research Areas
Programming Languages / Formal Methods / Software Engineering


Articles in Conference Proceedings
Faria Kalim, Karl Palmskog, Jayasi Mehar, Adithya Murali, Indranil Gupta, P. Madhusudan. "Kaizen: Building a Verified and Performant Blockchain System." Proceedings of Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD), 2019. 
Umang Mathur, P. Madhusudan, and Mahesh Viswanathan. "Decidable verification of uninterpreted programs." Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 3, no. POPL (2019): 46.
Angello Astorga,, P. Madhusudan, Shambwaditya Saha, Shiyu Wang, and Tao Xie. "Learning stateful preconditions modulo a test generator." In Proceedings of the 40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation, pp. 775-787. ACM, 2019.
Christof Loding, P. Madhusudan, and Lucas Pena. Foundations for natural proofs and quantifier instantiation. Proc. ACM Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2018, Article 10, 30 pages.
S. Bandhakavi, S. King, P. Madhusudan, M. Winslett.
VEX: Vetting Browser Extensions For Security Vulnerabilities.
Proc. of 19th USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, DC, USA, 2010, USENIX. (Acc rate:14.8%)
Won the Best Paper Award
R. Alur and P. Madhusudan.
"Visibly Pushdown Languages."
In Proc. Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC), pp. 202-211, Chicago, 2004. (Acc rate: 25.8%)


Other Scholarly Activities
Visited Microsoft Research, India during sabbatical (2012-2013).
Helped initiate a very large MOOC platform for India, called MASSIVELY EMPOWERED CLASSROOMS.
This massive online classroom setting is a unique blended classroom meant for undergraduate students in India.
Undergraduate colleges in India have a huge quality problem. The blended classroom allows tens of thousands of students in India
to access quality lectures and class material that is synchronized with their study.
Huge grassroots movement to engage teachers, involve them in the platform, incentivize colleges to participate, and certificate
program to incentivize students to take the course to get jobs.
Organized and partially lectured the first course on the platform as well.
The program has been a huge success with a large number of courses and tens of thousands of undergraduate students each semester.

Recent Courses TaughtCS 173 - Discrete Structures
CS 173 - Discrete Structures- Honors
CS 173 - Discrete Structures-Honors
CS 196 73 - Freshman Honors
CS 199 173 - Supplementary proj for CS-173
CS 474 (CS 498 MP3, CS 498 MP4) - Logic in Computer Science
CS 477 (ECE 478) - Formal Software Devel Methods
CS 521 - Adv Topics in Pgm Systems
CS 591 FM (CS 591 FMG) - Formal Methods Seminar
CS 598 MP - Software Verification

