


Phillip H Geil 





Professor Emeritus



geil@illinois.edu
 


Education
Ph.D.	Physics	University of Wisconsin	1956
M.S.	Physics	University of Wisconsin	1954	
B.S.	Sec. Educ.	Wisconsin State College	1952

BiographyProfessor Emeritus Phil Geil was Associate Head of the Department of Materials Science and Engineering and was a founder of the polymer group which led to the formation of the Department through the merger of the Metallurgy and Ceramics Departments. He is the editor of the Journal of Macromolecular Science and a fellow of the American Physical Society (APS). Following periods at E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Camille Dreyfuss Laboratory, and Case Institute of Technology (which later became Case Western Reserve University), where he was one of the several founding members of the group that has evolved into the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering, Professor Geil joined the University of Illinois as Professor in 1979. A renowned scholar in the characterization of polymer morphology and solid state structure, Professor Geil is also known for his expertise and pioneering research in polymer microscopy and electron diffraction for polymer crystal structure determination. He has conducted pioneering research of lasting significance in numerous areas of polymer morphology and biophysics. His publication–“Polymer Single Crystals”, which was written more than 40 years ago, still remains an excellent summary of polymer morphology. In addition, Professor Geil as an educator, has guided numerous undergraduate and graduate students, as well as post doctoral researchers, many of whom have made major contributions in academia and industry. The Geil Scholarship Fund was also established in his name to benefit students in the Material Science and Engineering Department of University of Illinois.
Academic Positions
Professor Emeritus of Materials Science and Engineering  University of Illinois  (2008-)
Professor of Materials Science and Engineering  University of Illinois  (1987-2008)
Professor of Polymer Science  University of Illinois (1984-1987)
Professor of Met. and Min. Engr.  University of Illinois (1979-84)



Journal Editorships
Editor, J. Macromolecular Science -Physics 1967 to date

