


Robert S Averback 





Professor Emeritus


(217) 333-4302
averback@illinois.edu
1007 Superconductivity Center


Professional Highlights
Professor Averback received his PhD for work in low-temperature,    solid-state physics at Michigan State University in 1972. He became    interested in materials science and ion-solid interactions while a    postdoctoral fellow at Cornell University. Before coming to the    University of Illinois as professor in 1987, he was a staff physicist at    Argonne National Laboratory for 13 years. Professor Averback spent  one   year as a guest scientist at the Julich Research Center in  Germany. He   was a co-recipient of the Department of Energy award for  sustained   outstanding research in 1985 for his work on  radiation-induced   segregation and is an Alexander von Humboldt Senior  Research Fellow. He   is a member of the American Physical Society,  Materials Research   Society, TMS and Bohmische Physicalishe Society. He  was named the Donald   Burnett Teacher of the Year (2002) and holds the  Donald W. Hamer   Professorship in Materials Science and Engineering  (2002-present).

Research Statement
Advanced materials for energy applications are   currently   being developed with ultrafine, highly non-equilibrium    microstructures, which can  be tailored for specific applications, and    they are often exposed to extreme  environments.  My research program    investigates  the fundamental aspects of materials processes in such  far   from equilibrium  conditions. It includes irradiation effects in  metals   and oxide ceramics,  forced atomic mixing and phase formation  during   severe plastic deformation, the  mechanical properties of    nanocrystalline materials, and ultrafast dynamics in  materials    subjected to femtosecond laser irradiation. These various topics are     studied using a combination of computer modeling and experimental    methods.
The research on irradiation effects employs molecular     dynamics and kinetic Monte Carlo methods at  the atomic level and phase    field modeling over longer length scales. The work  on metals explores    self-organization of nonequilibrium phases during high  temperature    irradiation in attempts to stabilize microstructures at the  nanometer    length scale, and under the extreme conditions expected for advanced     future reactors. Specimens are irradiated in our laboratory using a  3.0   MeV Van  de Graaff accelerator and characterized using a variety  of   advanced techniques:  x-ray diffraction, atom probe tomography, and    transmission electron microscopy.  Our work on irradiated oxide  ceramics   has been examining the kinetic behavior  of fission gas  bubbles in UO2   fuels, their nucleation, growth and  resolution in the  matrix during   irradiation. The research on metals subjected  to severe  plastic   deformations examines predominantly phase formation and     self-organization during ball milling, high pressure torsion or equal    channel  angular processing, and all at elevated temperatures. The aim    is to develop new  materials that are structured at the nanometer  length   scale, but which are  stable at high temperatures. The  mechanical   properties of these new materials  are studied as well.  Again, we use   both computer simulation and experiments to  advance our  research.    Lastly this  research program examines the kinetics of  melting and   solidification in metals  irradiated with femtosecond  lasers in order to   understand the basic mechanisms  of phase  transformations at far from   equilibrium conditions.



Selected Articles in Journals
Nhon Q. Vo, Robert S. Averback, Pellon Bellon, and Alfredo Caro, “Limits of Hardness at the Nanoscale: Molecular dynamics simulations,” Phys. Rev. B (Rapid Communications) 78 241402 (2008)
W. L. Chan, K. Zhou, V. Nhon, Y. Ashkenazy, D. G. Cahill, and R. S. Averback, "Stress induced in platinum thin films by low energy ion irradiation," Phys. Rev. B 77, 205405 (2008).

N.Q. Vo, R.S. Averback, P. Bellon, S. Odunuga, and A. Caro, “Quantitative description of plastic deformation in nanocrystalline Cu: Dislocation glide versus grain boundary sliding,” Phys. Rev. B, 77, 134108 (2008).
222.	P. Bellon, R.S. Averback S. Odunuga, Y. Li, P. Krasnochtchekov, A. Caro, “Crossover from superdiffusive to diffusive mixing in plastically deformed solids” Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 110602 (2007).
Y. Ashkenazy and R.S. Averback, “Atomic mechanisms controlling crystallization behavior in metals at deep undercoolings,” EPL, Vol. 79(2), 26005 (2007).
P. Krasnochtchekov, R.S. Averback, and P. Bellon, Phase separation and dynamic patterning in Cu1-xCox films under ion irradiation Phys. Rev. B 72, 174102 (2005).
Mayr SG. Ashkenazy Y. Albe K. Averback RS. Mechanisms of radiation-induced viscous flow: Role of point defects, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 055505, 2003.
T. Diaz de la Rubia, R. S. Averback, R. Benedek and W. E. King, “Role of thermal spikes in energetic displacement cascades,” Physical Rev. Lett., Vol. 59, No. 17, p. 1930-3, 1987.

Research Honors
Board of Directors, Materials Research Society  (2004-2007)
Donald Hamer Professorship (2003-)
Fellow of the APS (2001)
American Vacuum Society, Distinguished Lecturer  (1997)
Alexander Von Humboldt Award for U.S. Senior Scientists  (1993)
Co-recipient of the 1984 DOE Basic Energy Sciences Award for sustained outstanding research in materials science (1984)

Recent Courses TaughtMSE 404 MP1 (MSE 404 MP2) - Metals Processing

