


Syed Bahauddin Alam he/him/his





Assistant Professor


(217) 300-5835
alams@illinois.edu
119 Talbot Laboratory


For More Information
Illinois Experts profile
Google Scholar
Personal Website

Education
Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (BUET), B.Sc. in Electrical and Electronics Engineering, 2011
University of Cambridge, MPhil in Nuclear Energy, 2013
University of Cambridge, PhD in Nuclear Engineering, 2018


BiographyDr. Syed Bahauddin Alam is an Assistant Professor of Nuclear, Plasma and Radiological Engineering at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). He leads MARTIANS (Machine Learning & ARTficial Intelligence for Advancing Nuclear Systems) Lab [https://sbahauddin.tech/]. Dr. Alam received several Awards and Honors for his research and teaching. He received the Outstanding Teaching Award from Missouri S&T in 2021. He was awarded the Most Exemplary Graduate Fellow Award on “Nuclear Nonproliferation Fellowship 2017” by the Korea Advanced Institute of Science & Tech (KAIST). He was also the winner of the ANS Best Student Paper Award in recognition of the “Exceptional Quality of the Paper” (ICAPP 2016), Nominated for the Young Generation/Student Award for the Outstanding Paper (ICAPP 2017), and ANS Best Technical Poster Award (NURETH-16). He was also awarded the Cambridge Philosophical Society “Research Studentships Award” (2017) during his Ph.D. at Cambridge University.
Research Thrusts:
Thrust 1: Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Machine Learning (ML) applications for nuclear systems
Thrust 1A: Intelligent Digital Twins for Nuclear Plant Asset Monitoring with Explainable AI
Thrust 1B: Structural Health Monitoring of Nuclear Components
Thrust 2: Multiphysics modeling for advanced nuclear system
Thrust 2A: Multi-Scale & Coupled Multiphysics (Neutronics/Thermal-Hydraulics/Fuel Performance)  
Thrust 2B: Multiscale Modeling with Uncertainty Quantification and Robust Optimization
Thrust 2C: Modeling of Advanced Nuclear/Reactor System Design with Optimization 
Thrust 3: Cross-cutting & system decision-making for nuclear systems
Thrust 3A: Verification & Validation of Multiphysics Model
Thrust 3B: Zero-Trust: Next-Generation Cyber Threats
Thrust 3C: Instrumentation, Controls, & Natural Language Processing
Academic Positions
2023-Present, Assistant Professor, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Nuclear Plasma and Radiological Engineering (100% FTE)

2023-Present, Assistant Professor, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, National Center for Supercomputing Applications (0% FTE)
2020-2023, Assistant Professor, Missouri University of Science and Technology,  Nuclear Engineering and Radiation Science

Research Interests
Advanced Nuclear/Reactor System Design with Instrumentation & Controls
Coupled Multiphysics (Neutronics/Thermal-Hydraulics/Fuel Performance) with Predictive Algorithms 
Multiscale Modeling with Uncertainty Quantification and Robust Optimization
Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning-Driven Digital Twin for Nuclear Systems


Research Areas
Reactor Physics


Recent Courses TaughtNPRE 200 - Mathematics for NPRE
NPRE 247 - Modeling Nuclear Energy System

