


Vernon L Snoeyink 





Professor EmeritusProfessor Emeritus


(217) 300-3858
snoeyink@illinois.edu
3230c Newmark Civil Engineering Bldg


Biography
Vernon  L. Snoeyink holds a B.S. in civil engineering (1964), M.S. in sanitary  engineering (1966), and Ph.D. in water resources engineering (1968), all  from the University of Michigan. He was on the faculty of the  department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of  Illinois from 1969 until 2005, when he retired. From 1985-1999 he served  as Coordinator of the Environmental Engineering and Science Program.
Dr. Snoeyink has taught graduate and undergraduate courses in water  chemistry and water quality control, as well as a course in cultural  awareness and speech enhancement to advanced doctoral students. He is a  co-author of the book Water Chemistry (John Wiley, 1980).
Dr. Snoeyink is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, the  American Society of Civil Engineers, the American Water Works  Association, the Association of Environmental Engineering and Science  Professors, and the International Water Association. He served as  President of the Association of Engineering and Science Professors and  currently is on the Editorial Advisory Board of AQUA.
Dr. Snoeyink's research awards include the Association of  Environmental Engineering and Science Professors Distinguished  Lectureship, the Research Award from the American Water Works  Association, the Warren A. Hall Medal from the University Council on  Water Resources, the Samuel Arnold Greeley Award and the Simon Freese  Award from the American Society of Civil Engineers, the Thomas Feng  Distinguished Lectureship from the University of Massachusetts, and  theTau Beta Pi Daniel C. Drucker Eminent Faculty Award from the  University of Illinois among others. He has been recognized several  times at the University of Illinois for excellence in teaching at the  Department, College of Engineering and Campus levels, including the  Everitt Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching in 1982 and 1998,  and the Campus Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching in 1983.  In 2002, he received the The Multi-Year Faculty Achievement Award for  continual commitment to stewardship and excellence in advising.
Research StatementDr. Snoeyink's research has focused on drinking water quality control. His research program in recent years has centered on the removal of organic and inorganic contaminants from water using adsorption systems, especially granular and powdered activated carbon systems that are coupled with membrane systems. Also, he is investigating the mechanisms of formation and means to control water quality problems that develop in drinking water distribution systems as a result of reactions of iron, aluminum and other inorganic substances.

Research Areas
Environmental Engineering and Science


