


Xing Wang 





Associate Professor


(217) 333-9278
xingw@illinois.edu
0250 Everitt Laboratory


For More Information
Xingw Nucleic Acids Programming Lab (NAPL) at UIUC
Xingw lab at Illinois experts profile

Xingw lab profile at Chemistry Department, UIUC


Education
New York University, Ph.D., 2009

BiographyDr. Xing Wang received a Ph.D. in Chemistry from New York University.  He did his postdoctoral training at Princeton University to explore novel functions of synthetic RNAs in genome editing.  He is a recipient of the Mikashi Awards in 2021.  He was selected as a fellow of Y Combinator Founder Cohort in 2021.  Dr. Wang is a co-founder of a startup company, Atom Bioworks Inc., where he currently serves as a scientific advisor.  His team's DNA Machine Demo was selected by TechCrunch as a best project in the Y Combinator’s W21 Demo Day event.  Before joining UIUC, Dr. Wang was an Assistant Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology and the Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Academic Positions
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies (CBIS), Biochemistry and Biophysics Program (BCBP), Center for Materials, Devices, and Integrated Systems (cMDIS), Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2014-2019

Research Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry, Holonyak Micro & Nanotechnology Laboratory (MNTL), Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology (IGB), Center for Genomic Diagnostics (CGD), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2019-2024

Research Associate Professor, Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2022-2024

Associate Professor, Department of Bioengineering, Department of Chemistry, Holonyak Micro & Nanotechnology Laboratory (MNTL), Carl R. Woese Institute for Genomic Biology (IGB), Center for Genomic Diagnostics (CGD), Cancer Center at Illinois (CCIL), University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2024-present

Documents
Photo of Prof. Xing Wang

Major Consulting Activities
Scientific Advisor and co-Founder, Atom Bioworks Inc., Cary, NC, 2020-present 

Professional Registrations
American Chemical Society, 2003-present

International Society for Nanoscale Science, Computation and Engineering, 2003-present

Materials Research Society, 2020-present


Research StatementDr. Xing Wang is a bioengineer and biochemist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC).  His research group utilizes nucleic acids and protein engineering to evolve new molecular binders, and create and customize designer DNA nanostructure-based “plug-and-play” platforms for bioengineering and bionanotechnology applications centered on healthcare.  He also has training in RNA-mediated genome programming and cellular engineering, and RNA chemistry and biology.  Dr. Wang is the inventor of the DNA Star and DNA Net platforms/strategy for multivalent and pattern-recognition enabled disease diagnostics and therapeutics (Nat. Chem., 2020; Nat. Protoc., 2022; J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2023, 2024).  Dr. Wang's Nucleic Acids Programming Lab (NAPL) is focusing on the creation and development of (1) effective therapeutic candidates and targeted drug/mRNA delivery platforms for cancer treatment and immunotherapy, as well as inhibition and prevention of viral infections, (2) ultrasensitive and inexpensive biosensors for rapid, simple, and amplification free disease diagnostics in point-of-care, self-testing, and laboratory-based high-throughput settings, (3) machine learning model, molecular docking, and molecular dynamic simulations pipeline to rapidly obtain new ligands for targeted drug delivery, and (4) molecular barcodes for multiplex and high resolution biosensing and imaging.  His research group is currently supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIBIB, NIAID, NIDCR, NIAAA, NCI) and National Science Foundation (NSF).
Research Interests
Nucleic Acids Engineering

Designer DNA Nanostructure
Biosensing and Biomedicine
Bionanotechnology
Protein Engineering


Research Areas
Biomolecular engineering
Bionanotechnology
Biophotonics
Biosensors
Biotechnology
Cell and molecular engineering
Nanomaterials
Nanomedicine
Nanosensors
Point-of-care diagnostics


Research Topics
Bio-Micro and Nanotechnology
Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Engineering
Synthetic Bioengineering

Selected Articles in Journals
Xingw group publication

Research Honors
DNA Machine Demo was selected by TechCrunch as a best project in the Y Combinator’s W21 Demo Day event (2021)
Fellow of Y Combinator Founder Cohort (2021)
Mikashi Award (2021)

Recent Courses TaughtBIOE 434 - Immunoengineering
BIOE 571 - Biological Measurement I
BIOE 598 BTO (BIOE 598 BTP, BIOE 498 BTP) - Biotech: Princ, Tools, Appli
PATH 494 - Intro to Research Methodology

